LEGAL CORPUS - Comprehensive Indian Legal Database

INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860

Section 1 - Title and extent of operation of the Code
This Act shall be called the Indian Penal Code, and shall extend to the whole of India.

Section 2 - Punishment of offences committed within India
Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Code and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.

Section 299 - Culpable Homicide
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

Section 300 - Murder
Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused.

Section 302 - Punishment for Murder
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 304 - Punishment for Culpable Homicide not Amounting to Murder
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 307 - Attempt to Murder
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 309 - Attempt to Commit Suicide
Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards the commission of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

Section 320 - Grievous Hurt
The following kinds of hurt only are designated as grievous: First, emasculation; Second, permanent privation of the sight of either eye; Third, permanent privation of the hearing of either ear; Fourth, privation of any member or joint; Fifth, destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint; Sixth, permanent disfiguration of the head or face; Seventh, fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth; Eighth, any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer, during the space of twenty days, to be unable to follow his ordinary pursuits.

Section 375 - Rape
A man is said to commit rape if he has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six following descriptions: First, against her will; Second, without her consent; Third, with her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is interested in fear of death or of hurt; Fourth, with her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband, and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married; Fifth, with her consent, when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to which she gives her consent; Sixth, with or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age.

Section 376 - Punishment for Rape
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 377 - Unnatural Offences
Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 378 - Theft
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.

Section 379 - Punishment for Theft
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 390 - Robbery
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. When theft is robbery: Theft is robbery if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.

Section 395 - Dacoity
When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit dacoity.

Section 406 - Criminal Breach of Trust
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits criminal breach of trust.

Section 415 - Cheating
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat.

Section 420 - Cheating and Dishonestly Inducing Delivery of Property
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 498A - Husband or Relative of Husband of a Woman Subjecting Her to Cruelty
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

Article 12 - Definition of State
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the State includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

Article 13 - Laws Inconsistent with or in Derogation of the Fundamental Rights
All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void. The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.

Article 14 - Equality Before Law
The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.

Article 15 - Prohibition of Discrimination on Grounds of Religion, Race, Caste, Sex or Place of Birth
The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment, or the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.

Article 16 - Equality of Opportunity in Matters of Public Employment
There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State. No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.

Article 19 - Protection of Certain Rights Regarding Freedom of Speech
All citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, to assemble peaceably and without arms, to form associations or unions, to move freely throughout the territory of India, to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India, and to practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.

Article 20 - Protection in Respect of Conviction for Offences
No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commission of the act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence. No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once. No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.

Article 21 - Protection of Life and Personal Liberty
No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.

Article 21A - Right to Education
The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.

Article 22 - Protection Against Arrest and Detention
No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice. Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate.

Article 32 - Remedies for Enforcement of Rights
The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed. The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.

CONTRACT ACT, 1872

Section 2 - Interpretation Clause
When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing anything, with a view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or abstinence, he is said to make a proposal. When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the proposal is said to be accepted. A proposal, when accepted, becomes a promise.

Section 10 - What Agreements are Contracts
All agreements are contracts if they are made by the free consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not hereby expressly declared to be void.

Section 11 - Who are Competent to Contract
Every person is competent to contract who is of the age of majority according to the law to which he is subject, and who is of sound mind, and is not disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject.

Section 13 - Consent Defined
Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon the same thing in the same sense.

Section 14 - Free Consent Defined
Consent is said to be free when it is not caused by coercion, as defined in section 15, or by undue influence, as defined in section 16, or by fraud, as defined in section 17, or by misrepresentation, as defined in section 18, or by mistake, subject to the provisions of sections 20, 21 and 22.

Section 15 - Coercion
Coercion is the committing, or threatening to commit, any act forbidden by the Indian Penal Code, or the unlawful detaining, or threatening to detain, any property, to the prejudice of any person whatever, with the intention of causing any person to enter into an agreement.

Section 17 - Fraud
Fraud means and includes any of the following acts committed by a party to a contract, or with his connivance, or by his agent, with intent to deceive another party thereto or his agent, or to induce him to enter into the contract: the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one who does not believe it to be true; the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact; a promise made without any intention of performing it; any other act fitted to deceive; any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent.

Section 23 - What Consideration and Objects are Lawful
The consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless it is forbidden by law, is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law, or is fraudulent, or involves or implies injury to the person or property of another, or the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public policy.

Section 25 - Agreement Without Consideration Void
An agreement made without consideration is void, unless it is expressed in writing and registered under the law for the time being in force for the registration of documents, and is made on account of natural love and affection between parties standing in a near relation to each other, or unless it is a promise to compensate for something done, or unless it is a promise to pay a debt barred by limitation law.

Section 56 - Agreement to do Impossible Act
An agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void. A contract to do an act which, after the contract is made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor could not prevent, becomes unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful.

INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872

Section 3 - Interpretation Clause
Evidence means and includes all statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry; such statements are called oral evidence. All documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of the Court; such documents are called documentary evidence.

Section 24 - Confession Caused by Inducement, Threat or Promise
A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement, threat or promise, having reference to the charge against the accused person, proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person grounds, which would appear to him reasonable, for supposing that by making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against him.

Section 25 - Confession to Police Officer not to be Proved
No confession made to a police officer shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence.

Section 27 - How Much of Information Received from Accused May be Proved
Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.

Section 32 - Cases in which Statement of Relevant Fact by Person who is Dead or Cannot be Found
Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts.

Section 45 - Opinions of Experts
When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or of science or art, or as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, the opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, or in questions as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, are relevant facts. Such persons are called experts.

Section 101 - Burden of Proof
Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person.

Section 106 - Burden of Proving Fact Especially Within Knowledge
When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.

Section 114 - Court May Presume Existence of Certain Facts
The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.

CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973

Section 41 - When Police May Arrest Without Warrant
Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been so concerned.

Section 154 - Information in Cognizable Cases
Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf.

Section 161 - Examination of Witnesses by Police
Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.

Section 167 - Procedure When Investigation Cannot be Completed in Twenty-Four Hours
Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by section 57, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well-founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter prescribed relating to the case, and shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.

Section 438 - Direction for Grant of Bail to Person Apprehending Arrest
When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, the following factors, namely, the nature and gravity of the accusation, the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence, the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice, and where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by having him so arrested, either reject the application or issue a direction for the grant of bail to the person apprehending arrest.

Section 439 - Special Powers of High Court or Court of Session Regarding Bail
A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of section 437, may impose any condition which it considers necessary for the purposes mentioned in that sub-section and may set aside or modify any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing on bail.

HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955

Section 5 - Conditions for a Hindu Marriage
A marriage may be solemnized between any two Hindus, if the following conditions are fulfilled: neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage; at the time of the marriage, neither party is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty-one years and the bride, the age of eighteen years at the time of the marriage; the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two; the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two.

Section 9 - Restitution of Conjugal Rights
When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the district court, for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.

Section 10 - Judicial Separation
Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after the commencement of this Act, may present a petition to the district court praying for a decree for judicial separation on the ground that the other party has, after the solemnization of the marriage, treated the petitioner with cruelty, or has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition, or has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion, or has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering from a virulent and incurable form of leprosy, or has been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form, or has renounced the world by entering any religious order, or has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more.

Section 13 - Divorce
Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented by either the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the ground that the other party has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any person other than his or her spouse, or has, after the solemnization of the marriage, treated the petitioner with cruelty, or has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.

MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988

Section 3 - Necessity for Driving Licence
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place unless he holds an effective driving licence issued to him authorizing him to drive the vehicle; and no person shall so drive a transport vehicle other than a motor cab or motor cycle hired for his own use or rented under any scheme made under sub-section (2) of section 75 unless his driving licence specifically entitles him so to do.

Section 185 - Driving by a Drunken Person or by a Person Under the Influence of Drugs
Whoever, while driving, or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg per 100 ml of blood detected in a test by a breath analyzer, shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both; and for a second or subsequent offence, if committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 192 - Using Vehicle Without Registration
Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 39 or of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the purpose for which the vehicle may be driven, shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees for a second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both.

CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019

Section 2 - Definitions
Consumer means any person who buys any goods or avails any service for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any beneficiary of such goods or service when such goods or service is availed of with the approval of such person, but does not include a person who avails of such goods or service for any commercial purpose.

Section 35 - Jurisdiction of District Commission
The District Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services and the compensation, if any, claimed does not exceed one crore rupees.

Section 47 - Jurisdiction of State Commission
Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services and the compensation, if any, claimed exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees.

Section 58 - Jurisdiction of National Commission
Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services and the compensation, if any, claimed exceeds ten crore rupees.

RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005

Section 2 - Definitions
Right to Information means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes the right to inspection of work, documents, records, taking notes, extracts or certified copies of documents or records, taking certified samples of material, obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts where such information is stored in a computer or in any other device.

Section 4 - Obligations of Public Authorities
Every public authority shall maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a manner and the form which facilitates the right to information under this Act and ensure that all records that are appropriate to be computerised are, within a reasonable time and subject to availability of resources, computerised and connected through a network all over the country on different systems so that access to such records is facilitated.

Section 6 - Request for Obtaining Information
A person, who desires to obtain any information under this Act, shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official language of the area in which the application is being made, accompanying such fee as may be prescribed, to the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, of the concerned public authority.

LANDMARK CASE LAWS

Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala (1973)
This landmark case established the doctrine of basic structure of the Constitution. The Supreme Court held that while Parliament has the power to amend the Constitution, it cannot alter its basic structure. This case is considered one of the most important cases in Indian constitutional law.

Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (1978)
The Supreme Court expanded the scope of Article 21, holding that the procedure established by law must be fair, just, and reasonable, not merely any procedure. This case established that the right to life and personal liberty includes the right to travel abroad.

Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan (1997)
This case led to the formulation of guidelines to prevent sexual harassment of women at workplace, which later became the basis for the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. The Supreme Court held that sexual harassment at workplace violates fundamental rights.

Mohd. Ahmed Khan v. Shah Bano Begum (1985)
A landmark case dealing with maintenance rights of Muslim women, which led to the enactment of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986. The Supreme Court held that a Muslim woman is entitled to maintenance under Section 125 of CrPC.

State of Maharashtra v. Indian Hotel and Restaurants Association (2013)
The Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the Maharashtra Prohibition of Obscene Dance in Hotels, Restaurants and Bar Rooms and Protection of Dignity of Women Act, 2016.

Naz Foundation v. Government of NCT of Delhi (2009)
The Delhi High Court decriminalized consensual homosexual acts between adults by reading down Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code. However, this was later overturned by the Supreme Court in 2013, and then again decriminalized in 2018.

Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India (2018)
The Supreme Court decriminalized consensual homosexual acts between adults, reading down Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code. This landmark judgment recognized the rights of the LGBTQ+ community in India.

Joseph Shine v. Union of India (2018)
The Supreme Court decriminalized adultery by striking down Section 497 of the Indian Penal Code, holding that it violated the right to equality and dignity of women.

Rights of Accused Persons

Every person accused of a crime has the right to: A fair and public trial by an independent and impartial tribunal, Legal representation of their choice, Presumption of innocence until proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt, Protection against self-incrimination, Right to remain silent, Right to be informed of the charges, Right to cross-examine witnesses, Right to appeal against conviction, Protection against double jeopardy, Right to speedy trial, Protection against cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

Fundamental Rights and Duties

Fundamental Rights under Indian Constitution include Right to Equality (Articles 14-18), Right to Freedom (Articles 19-22), Right against Exploitation (Articles 23-24), Right to Freedom of Religion (Articles 25-28), Cultural and Educational Rights (Articles 29-30), and Right to Constitutional Remedies (Article 32).

Fundamental Duties of citizens include: To abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem, To cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom, To uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India, To defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so, To promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities, To value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture, To protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures, To develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform, To safeguard public property and to abjure violence, To strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement.

LEGAL PROCEDURES

Filing a First Information Report (FIR): Any person who has knowledge of the commission of a cognizable offence can file an FIR at the police station having jurisdiction. The FIR should contain all material facts relating to the offence. The police officer is bound to register the FIR if the information discloses a cognizable offence.

Bail Procedures: Bail is the release of an accused person from custody, on the condition that he will appear before the court when required. There are two types of bail: Bailable offences where bail is a matter of right, and Non-bailable offences where bail is at the discretion of the court. Factors considered for granting bail include the nature and gravity of the offence, the character and antecedents of the accused, the possibility of the accused fleeing from justice, and the possibility of the accused tampering with evidence.

Arrest Procedures: No person can be arrested without being informed of the grounds of arrest. Every person arrested must be produced before a magistrate within 24 hours of arrest. The arrested person has the right to consult a legal practitioner of his choice. The arrested person has the right to be examined by a medical practitioner.

Trial Procedures: Criminal trials in India follow the adversarial system. The prosecution has to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. The accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty. The trial must be conducted in open court. The accused has the right to cross-examine prosecution witnesses. The accused has the right to present defence evidence and witnesses.

APPEAL PROCEDURES

Appeal from Magistrate to Sessions Court: Any person convicted by a Magistrate may appeal to the Sessions Court. The appeal must be filed within 30 days of the judgment. The Sessions Court may confirm, reverse or modify the conviction or sentence.

Appeal from Sessions Court to High Court: Any person convicted by a Sessions Court may appeal to the High Court. The appeal must be filed within 90 days of the judgment. The High Court has the power to confirm, reverse or modify the conviction or sentence, or order a retrial.

Appeal to Supreme Court: An appeal lies to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence of a High Court if the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution, or if the Supreme Court grants special leave to appeal.

SPECIAL LAWS

Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (POCSO): This Act provides for the protection of children from offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and pornography. The Act defines a child as any person below the age of 18 years. The Act provides for stringent punishment for sexual offences against children.

Domestic Violence Act, 2005: This Act provides for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family. The Act defines domestic violence to include physical, sexual, verbal, emotional and economic abuse.

Information Technology Act, 2000: This Act provides legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and other means of electronic communication. The Act deals with cyber crimes and electronic signatures. The Act provides for punishment for various cyber offences like hacking, data theft, cyber terrorism, etc.

Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988: This Act provides for the prevention of corruption and for matters connected therewith. The Act defines various offences of corruption and provides for punishment. The Act applies to public servants and persons in positions of authority.

Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881: This Act regulates the law relating to promissory notes, bills of exchange and cheques. The Act provides for the rights and liabilities of parties to negotiable instruments. The Act provides for punishment for dishonour of cheques.

Family Laws

Hindu Succession Act, 1956: This Act governs the succession and inheritance of property among Hindus. The Act provides for equal rights to sons and daughters in ancestral property. The Act was amended in 2005 to give daughters equal rights in ancestral property.

Muslim Personal Law: Muslim personal law in India is based on the Sharia law. The law governs marriage, divorce, inheritance and other personal matters for Muslims. The law allows polygamy for men with certain conditions. The law provides for different inheritance rights for men and women.

Christian Marriage Act, 1872: This Act provides for the solemnization of marriages among Christians in India. The Act requires registration of marriages. The Act provides for grounds for divorce.

Special Marriage Act, 1954: This Act provides for a special form of marriage for people of India and all Indian nationals in foreign countries, irrespective of the religion or faith followed by either party. The Act allows inter-religious and inter-caste marriages.

LABOR LAWS

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947: This Act provides for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes. The Act provides for the constitution of works committees, conciliation officers, boards of conciliation, courts of inquiry, labour courts and industrial tribunals. The Act provides for the right to strike and lockout.

Minimum Wages Act, 1948: This Act provides for fixing minimum rates of wages in certain employments. The Act applies to scheduled employments. The Act provides for the constitution of advisory boards and committees for fixing minimum wages.

Payment of Wages Act, 1936: This Act regulates the payment of wages to certain classes of employed persons. The Act provides for the time and mode of payment of wages. The Act provides for deductions that can be made from wages.

Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952: This Act provides for the institution of provident funds, pension funds and deposit-linked insurance funds for employees. The Act applies to establishments employing 20 or more persons.

PROPERTY LAWS

Transfer of Property Act, 1882: This Act defines and amends the law relating to the transfer of property by act of parties. The Act deals with sale, mortgage, lease, gift and exchange of property. The Act provides for the rights and obligations of parties to property transactions.

Registration Act, 1908: This Act provides for the registration of documents. Certain documents are required to be registered compulsorily. Registration provides notice to the public about the transaction. Registration is required for documents relating to immovable property.

Specific Relief Act, 1963: This Act provides for specific relief in cases of breach of contract and other civil wrongs. The Act provides for specific performance of contracts. The Act provides for injunctions and other equitable remedies.

TAX LAWS

Income Tax Act, 1961: This Act provides for the levy and collection of income tax in India. The Act defines various sources of income. The Act provides for various deductions and exemptions. The Act provides for the assessment and collection of tax.

Goods and Services Tax (GST) Act, 2017: This Act provides for the levy and collection of tax on intra-State supply of goods or services or both. GST is a comprehensive indirect tax on the manufacture, sale and consumption of goods and services. GST has replaced multiple indirect taxes.

COMPANY LAWS

Companies Act, 2013: This Act consolidates and amends the law relating to companies. The Act provides for the incorporation, regulation and winding up of companies. The Act provides for corporate governance, disclosure requirements and investor protection. The Act provides for various types of companies including private companies, public companies, one person companies, etc.

Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992: This Act provides for the establishment of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). SEBI regulates the securities market in India. SEBI has powers to investigate, adjudicate and impose penalties for violations of securities laws.

ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS

Environment Protection Act, 1986: This Act provides for the protection and improvement of environment. The Act empowers the Central Government to take measures to protect and improve the environment. The Act provides for the prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution.

Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974: This Act provides for the prevention and control of water pollution. The Act provides for the constitution of Central and State Pollution Control Boards. The Act provides for the prevention and control of water pollution.

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981: This Act provides for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution. The Act provides for the constitution of Central and State Pollution Control Boards. The Act provides for the prevention and control of air pollution.

Wildlife Protection Act, 1972: This Act provides for the protection of wild animals, birds and plants. The Act provides for the constitution of wildlife advisory boards. The Act provides for the establishment of national parks, wildlife sanctuaries and conservation reserves.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS

Copyright Act, 1957: This Act provides for the protection of literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works, cinematograph films and sound recordings. Copyright protection is available for original works. The Act provides for the rights of authors and copyright owners.

Trade Marks Act, 1999: This Act provides for the registration and protection of trade marks. A trade mark is a sign capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one enterprise from those of other enterprises. The Act provides for the registration, renewal and protection of trade marks.

Patents Act, 1970: This Act provides for the grant of patents for inventions. A patent gives the patentee the exclusive right to make, use, sell or import the patented invention. The Act provides for the procedure for grant of patents and protection of patent rights.

Designs Act, 2000: This Act provides for the registration and protection of designs. A design means only the features of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament or composition of lines or colours applied to any article. The Act provides for the registration and protection of designs.

